---
tags:
    - NT
    - Matthew
    - SotM
    - righteousness
title: Salt of the Earth
---

# Salt of the Earth (Matthew 5:13)

## Introduction

### Structure/Outline

The Manifesto of the King

1.  Citizens of the Kingdom (ch 5)

    1.  Quality (1-12)

    2.  **Function (13-16)**

    3.  Motive (17-48)

2.  Values of the Kingdom (ch 6)

3.  Relationship with the Kingdom (ch 7)

### Review (Beatitudes).

#### Relating to God

-   _poor in spirit_. humility & grace

-   _mourn_. conviction & repentance

-   _meek_. faith & commitment

-   _hunger & thirst_. sanctification

#### Relating to others

-   _merciful_. christian service

-   _pure in heart_. communion & prayer

-   _peacemakers_. wholeness & justice; reconciliation

-   _persecuted_ (because of righteousness)

!!! question "Icebreaker"
    
    What’s your favorite flavor of ice cream? Why?
    
    What's a situation in the world today that you think needs **salt**—something to stop it from getting worse?

### Passage

!!! quote "Matthew 5:13"

    13 You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled by men.

### Context

Explain that Jesus is teaching about the *righteousness needed* to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

This righteousness goes *beyond outward actions* (Pharisees) and **touches the heart**.

## First Metaphor: Salt

We will start by examining the phrase *salt of the earth*.

### Why was salt so important in the ancient world?

**Electrolytes**. essential for human survival, preventing dehydration.

**Preservation**. preventing spoilage, especially of meat.

**Flavoring**. making food palatable.

**Salarium**. Roman Soldiers paid part of wages in salt; i.e. *he’s not worth his salt*.

### What are some symbolic meanings of salt?

#### Old Testament Uses

**Barrenness**. where there is salt in the soil, things do not grow; sometimes associated with judgment.

> [`Jeremiah 17:6`](https://biblehub.com/jeremiah/17-6.htm). He will dwell in the *parched places* of the desert, in a
salt land *where no one lives*.

> [`Zephaniah 2:9`](https://biblehub.com/zephaniah/2-9.htm). a place of weeds and salt pits, a perpetual *wasteland*.

> [`Deuteronomy 29:23`](https://biblehub.com/deuteronomy/29-23.htm). All its soil will be a burning waste of sulfur and
salt, *unsown and unproductive*, with no plant growing on it.

> [`Psalm 107:34`](https://biblehub.com/psalm/107-34.htm). He turns…fruitful land into fields of salt, because of the
wickedness of its dwellers.

#### Meanings from Jesus

**Preservation**. prevents decay, symbolizing protection from moral corruption and sin.

-   integrity in business.

-   speaking out against injustice and oppression.

-   strengthening marriages and families.

**Flavor**. adds zest and enjoyment, representing the positive impact Christians should have on the world.

-   demonstrating love and compassion

-   acts of kindness

-   modeling joy and hope

**Hospitality**. used in meals, building relationships.

-   giving time, talents, and treasures

-   volunteering to serve

**Thirst**. salt makes us thirsty; believers, through their work and words, create a thirst for God.

-   disaster relief.

### What are we salting? And why?

We are to salt *the earth—mankind*, *society*, *the world*.

**The world is not good.**

Life has gone out of the body and the microbes of sin will eventually reduce it to a stinking, unapproachable carcass.

It might seem that human solutions apart from the Gospel will help the world. *It won’t*.

> [`Romans 1:29-31`](https://biblehub.com/romans/1.htm#29). They have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed, and depravity. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and malice. They are gossips, slanderers, God-haters, insolent, arrogant, and boastful. They invent new forms of evil; they disobey their parents. They are senseless, faithless, heartless, merciless.

**Left to itself,** **the world** **decays and becomes morally
corrupt.**

## What is the warning?

### If the Salt Has Become Tasteless…

#### How does salt becomes tasteless?

**Contamination**. salt comes from the Dead Sea and some marsh areas. It
often contained impurities (gypsum, earth, vegetable matter).

-   gypsum might make the salt more alkaline

-   other impurities is sufficient quantity could dilute or neutralize
    the salt's effectiveness.

#### How does this apply to us?

**Worldliness**. Anything that excludes the person and plan of God from
our lives, or that rejects God's viewpoint. Accepting the world's
values, standards, and methods for meeting our needs rather than relying
on God.

#### What ares some examples of worldliness?

-   half-hearted discipleship; lack of total commitment.

> [`Mark 9:33-50`](https://biblehub.com/mark/9.htm#33). disciples argue about who is the greatest.

-   jealousy

-   envy

-   lust

-   ambition

### How do we fail to be the salt of the earth?

#### Conformity.

When Christians _adopt the values, priorities, and lifestyles of the surrounding culture_ without discerning what is truly good and righteous, they *lose their distinctiveness*. They become tasteless salt.

!!! example "Conformity"

    Prioritizing career advancement, wealth accumulation, or social status above spiritual growth and service to others. Following trends in entertainment or fashion that compromise moral standards.

#### Isolationism.

*Retreating from the world* and isolating themselves in Christian subcultures. While separation from sin is necessary, complete isolation prevents Christians from having a positive influence on the broader society.

!!! example "Isolationism"
    
    Creating insular Christian communities that have little interaction with non-Christians. Focusing solely on internal church activities while ignoring the needs of the surrounding community.

#### Legalism & Judgmentalism.

We might _focus on external rules and regulations_ rather than on genuine love, grace, and compassion. Projecting a judgmental attitude toward those who don't conform to their standards.

!!! example "Legalism & Judgmentalism"
    
    Condemning others for their lifestyle choices without understanding their struggles or offering genuine support. Turning minor disagreements into major conflicts.

#### Political Obsession.

We start to equate the Christian faith with a particular political ideology or party. Believing that political power is the primary means of advancing God's kingdom.

!!! example "Political Obession"

    Making political allegiance a litmus test for Christian fellowship. Engaging in divisive rhetoric and demonizing political opponents. Forgetting that God is in charge of this world, no matter who is in power.

#### Compromising Truth.

We might _water down or distort biblical truth_ in an attempt to be more appealing or relevant to the surrounding culture.

!!! example "Compromise Truth"
    
    Avoiding difficult or unpopular teachings on sin, judgment, or repentance. Promoting a "feel-good" gospel that lacks substance and moral conviction.

#### Self-Righteousness & Hypocrisy.

We present a facade of moral superiority while failing to address our own shortcomings and sins.

!!! example "Self-Righteousness & Hypocrisy" 

    Criticizing others for behaviors they themselves engage in secretly. Failing to hold themselves to the same standards they demand of others.

#### Neglecting Social Justice.

We might ignoring or minimizing the needs of the poor, oppressed, and marginalized. Failing to advocate for justice and righteousness in society.

!!! example "Neglect for Social Justice"

    Ignoring systemic inequalities or injustices. Failing to speak out against exploitation, discrimination, or abuse.

#### Pride and Arrogance.

We believe that we have all the answers and look down on those who don't share our beliefs.

!!! example "Pride & Arrogance"

    Dismissing other perspectives without genuine consideration. Belittling or condescending to those who hold different views.

## How can salt be made salty again?

**Difficulty**. separating salt from its impurities.

**Solution**. Fellowship with Christ.

-   A Word-filled life.

> [`Joshua 1.8`](https://biblehub.com/joshua/1-8.htm). This Book of the Law must not depart from your mouth;
meditate on it day and night.

-   Spirit-filled life.

> [`1 Corinthians 3:16`](https://biblehub.com/1corinthians/3-16.htm). Do you not know that you yourselves are God’s
temple, and that God’s Spirit dwells in you?

-   Dying to self.

> [`Luke 9:23`](https://biblehub.com/luke/9-23.htm). If anyone wants to come after Me, he must deny himself and
take up his cross daily and follow Me.

-   Living by faith.

> [`Proverbs 3:5`](https://biblehub.com/proverbs/3-5.htm). Trust in the LORD with all your heart, and lean not on
your own understanding.

-   Making fellowship with God the goal.

> [`John 15:4`](https://biblehub.com/john/15-4.htm). Just as no branch can bear fruit by itself unless it remains
in the vine, neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in Me.

### What are some key actions?

-   Feed on the Word (Bible study).

-   Abide in Christ (prayer and dependence).

-   Rest in His control and provision (faith).

## What are the consequences of losing saltiness?

### Losing Our Saltiness

Jesus says we are **good for** **nothing**.

`Lose our influence`. Lose the ability to preserve and flavor the world
around us.

`Fail ``to fulfill purpose`. we will not fulfill our purpose to know,
love, and serve Him.

<span class="dfn">Accountability</span>. We are held accountable for how
we live.

`Romans 14:11-12`. As surely as I live, says the Lord, every knee will
bow before Me; every tongue will confess to God. So then, each of us
will give an account of himself to God.

## Closing Thought & Prayer

### Application

What are some subtle ways worldliness can creep into our lives today?"

How can we encourage one another to stay *salty*?

### Challenge

This week, identify one area where you might be allowing worldliness to
influence your life. Commit to seeking God's perspective and taking
steps to prioritize Him in that area.

### Pray.

Father, thank you for your word and for reminding us today that we are
called to be both salt in this world. Help us to understand the power
and responsibility that comes with being citizens of your Kingdom.

Lord, may we be a preserving influence in a world that is decaying,
adding flavor and hope where it is needed most. Prevent us from losing
our saltiness by compromising our faith or shrinking back from your
call.

Help us to be intentional about making a difference in our homes, our
schools, our workplaces, and our communities. Empower us to be agents of
your love and justice in the world.

We ask all of this in the name of Jesus. Amen.
